well meanwhile Aid has started arriving
in Gaza via a US military built
temporary floating Pier of trucks with
the aid rolled across the pier for the
first time into The besieged Enclave as
Israeli restrictions continued to
disrupt deliveries of vital food and
other supplies at Gaza border crossings
the US and Aid groups hope to increase
deliveries at the pier to as many as 150
trucks per day
well despite the efforts the un's food
program says the threat of famine has
never loomed larger for gaza's 2.2
million
people explosions and gunshots ring out
in the deserted streets of Rafa the
southern city is the latest focus of
operations of the Israeli
military Israel says hamas's last
remaining Fighters are based in Raa
along with the group's leaders
responsible for the October 7 terror
attack so it needs to send more troops
there our troops have destroyed several
tunnels and will destroy even more soon
this activity will intensify Hamas is
not an organization that can reorganize
it does not have the reserve troops it
does not have the ability to produce
Munitions it has no supplies the result
is we are cutting it off we are wearing
it
down Israeli tanks have already advanced
deep into Rafa's Eastern outskirts
pushing into residential areas
un says almost 600,000 people taking
refuge in Rafa have now left after
Israel took control of the Gaza side of
the Rafa border crossing supplies and
Medical Services have been
dwindling so food in which in place
already uh in southern Gaza are running
out um I think we're we're talking about
the the almost none left food in the
market very soon uh there'll be none
left U medical supplies in the hospitals
that remain in the South a couple two or
three weeks I think to go perhaps a
month eight agencies say a temporary
Pier anchored by US
troops and regular air drops are no
substitute for ground
deliveries Palestinians too have been
calling for the border crossing to
reopen
we don't want ships we want the border
crossings to open we want safety we want
official borders those planes as well
with the parachutes they threw food at
us like dogs like Beggars that doesn't
work it falls on people it brings his
problems with most operations disrupted
due to the Rua offensive and the
humanitarian situation already dire
agencies warn gazin are now facing an
immediate risk of
[Music]
famine well for more I'm joined Now by
Tess Ingram she is the spokesperson for
Unicef in New York and she just spent
two weeks in Gaza last month chess it's
good to have you with us I I want to
pick up on your experience that you had
in Gaza so recently um considering that
the UN is saying that the the threat of
famine remains real and acute for the
people in Gaza um is that also what you
saw it is unfortunately I think you know
our worst fears are being realized at
the moment we've been warning for months
about the risk of famine in Gaza and
particularly in the north of Gaza and
when I went to the north I walked around
a hospital where I saw many Mal narish
children and spoke to their parents it's
just heartbreaking to see a child in
that condition in so much pain and not
being able to receive the help that they
need to recover our fear now is that
because of the issues with Aid getting
in through those Southern border
crossings because of the Rafa offensive
the already dire situation in the South
could escalate to what we saw in the
north of Gaza uh in in a very short
space of time we do have Aid that is now
coming into the territory via this
floating Pier that we just reported on
um your agency says more than 300,000
children in Gaza are at risk of
malnutrition and
starvation how then do you decide which
children get the food considering that
the food is in short
supply yeah look it's really difficult
um at the moment when the needs are so
enormous and the aid is really A Drop in
the Ocean compared to those needs as a
humanitarian Aid work it's just
heartbreaking to know that you cannot
serve everybody but UNICEF is there
we're staying and we're doing our best
to deliver despite these really
difficult circumstances and reach the
children and families that need us the
most we try and plan our distributions
based on need but also we're restricted
by access um as as we've been saying now
for months it's really hard for us to
get the safety assurances that we need
to move to some of these areas so it's a
day by day play at the moment you know
more than half a million people have
fled Rafa in search of a safer Place Aid
agencies say that there are no more safe
places left for people to to go to give
us a sense of the challenges that Aid
agencies are going through to provide
help to these
people so there are two main areas where
people are being asked to move to from
Rafa and the estimated number of
displaced people that have fled Rafa in
the last 10 days is now at about 600
40,000 people so that's about half the
number of displaced people that were in
Rafa an enormous movement of people in
such a short amount of time and what
we're trying to do uh to service them in
these two areas they're going Al masasi
and deala is to assess their needs and
try and bring some level of basic
service to those areas because in Mal
masasi for example it's essentially a
sand June there's nothing there uh there
are no toilets there are no showers
there very little infrastructure for
people to build shelters against I
walked through that area and it was
already busy a month ago so I can only
imagine now and I'm hearing from
colleagues just how crowded it is but
it's very difficult for us to meet these
soaring needs when we can't get Aid in
so the the aid suppli is almost ground
virtually to a halt in the last two
weeks yeah and and it seems the world
detention is focused on the southern
part of Gaza but you know it's not
peaceful in in the North in fact
fighting continues in the northern part
of the the territory what what's the
humanitarian situation
there so the north of the Gaza Strip has
is the area that has been the most
affected by the fighting and the has had
the least access to Aid consistently
over the last seven months it's been
very difficult for Aid agencies to get
the safety assurances we need to to
travel north um we have one colleague uh
at UNICEF in the north of Gaza who
remains there and I've spoken to her and
she's told me just how difficult the
situation is there at the moment people
are being told to evacuate uh but these
are people who've been there now for
seven months and have survived serious
lack of services including a lack of
food and so people are unsure about what
to do now whether they really do take
that plunge and try and move but the
fighting is as you say intensifying in
the north as well as the South and we're
also seeing strikes in the middle area
so right across the Gaza Strip
children's lives remain at risk Tess
Ingram with UNICEF Tess we appreciate
your time and your input tonight thank
you and I'm joined Once More by Shina Lo
she's Communications adviser for the
Norwegian Refugee Council in Jerusalem
sh good to see you again Aid has now
started arriving in Gaza via the US
build Pier can this new Maritime route
bring enough Aid into the Gaza
Strip no this route is estimated to
bring only between 90 and maximum 150
truckloads per day at this point we need
to see a flood of humanitarian
assistance enter Gaza and the only
efficient and cost-effective way to do
that is through the crossings that
already exist there are literally
thousands of trucks lined up on the
Egyptian side of the Border waiting to
enter Gaza and we need those Crossings
to be operational in order for that Aid
to get in and help people as quickly as
because they need it m those Crossings
you mentioned it there they're not
operational right now let's talk about
the distribution of what is coming in
through the air and Via this new pier
can the goods coming in realistically
reach all the people in
need no the the airdrops by and large I
believe have been set focused on
Northern Gaza it's mostly food and maybe
some medicines that have been dropped
down we heard yesterday from uh about
staff of our in Northern Gaza who are
talking about that in addition to the
food that they're getting which at this
point uh the Convoy is coming in through
the the new newly open Northern eras
West Crossing is just wheat but people
are in need of shelter supplies they're
in need of hygiene kits they're in need
of other items that aren't entering
through these Crossings uh the the
airdrops are are not a costeffective way
there are lots of ways in which they can
cause harm either by Falling on on uh
Aid re I or falling into the sea as
we've seen and as as the the person in
your report said it's not a dignified
way for people to receive aid aid should
be distributed by humanitarians in an
orderly way to ensure that the most
vulnerable people are having access to
the items that they need all eyes are
currently on Rafa home to hundreds of
thousands of displaced people now with a
large scale military operation they're
looming what's their situation what are
their living conditions
I spoke yesterday to a colleague of ours
who is in Rafa she described a a city
that is has been largely deserted the UN
has said that 640,000 people as of this
morning had fled Rafa most are moving as
far to the West as they can they are
entering Barren strips of land areas
where they do not have capacity uh to or
the facilities and services needed in
order to uh in order to uh meet their
basic needs it's it's uh age Aid
agencies are overwhelmed trying to
respond to the needs but the needs keep
on growing desperation is high we've
heard that at our own Aid distributions
we've had uh Aid recipients uh faint
because they are so malnourished we've
seen people begging for any uh scrap of
assistance they can receive the
situation continues to deteriorate day
by day now with the situation so
volatile how does your organization
adapt its operations on the
ground well we've been working to get
the small amount of Aid that we received
right before the border crossings uh
distributed to people who are in need
but we are quickly running out of
supplies and once those supplies run out
unless these Crossings reopen we will
not be able to provide any much or any
response at all to the people who are in
need the shine low from the Norwegian
Refugee Council in Jerusalem always
great to get your insights thank you so
much